---
layout: post
title: "Underrepresentation of Black Girls in CS"
subtitle: "Midterm Analysis Paper"
background: '/img/posts/ai-skin-color.jpg'
---

## Background 
As a computer science major at a historically women's college, I recognize the privilege of my private education and exposure to diversity within the classrooms. However, my most recent internship experience at a large tech company has put me in positions where I am the only woman on a team with four other men in an internship cohort with not a single Black woman. It is by applying this intersectional lens that we are able to understand the macro and micro conditions that actively keep out Black women in computer science resulting in the underrepresentation. When discussing the use of the term “Black girls” or “Black women,” this analysis essay uses the expression to refer to women of the African diaspora. 

## Intersectionality 
Intersectionality is a concept coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw, which for the example of Black women in CS, can be described using a traffic analogy of an individual or group standing at the intersection of two streets on race and gender (Ross & Salinger, p. 73, 2017). It is only by imagining the intersection of being Black in the United States and a woman in a male dominated field that we can imagine their needs and where their experiences stand in this world. The underrepresentation of Black women in the field of tech is an intersectional issue because the systemic injustices and interpersonal microaggressions that result due to the layering of identities have put up barriers to entry into the field. “This [ omission ] of difference [in identity politics] is problematic, fundamentally because the violence that many women experience is often shaped by other dimensions of their identities, such as race and class,” which are aspects this essay will explore (Crenshaw, 2005, p. 1). 

## History 
This intersectional issue dates back to as early as the beginning of the history of computing. In 1842, the first of many computer programmers was a woman, Ada Lovelace, who wrote the first algorithm for a machine called the Analytical Engine. After World War II as coding jobs spread from the military into the public and private sectors, the field of CS was almost exclusively female, which is reflected in the education system in 1984 when women comprised 37% of all students graduating with degrees in computer science-related fields (Berkeley, 2021). The misconception was that writing code was a menial task such as typing or filing documents, so they left it for women. However, as programming became popular, men started taking programming jobs and pushing women out of the field. By 2010, that portion of women CS college graduates shrunk by more than half (Berkeley, 2021). This phenomenon is supported by the idea that “America has defined the roles to which each individual should subscribe. It has defined manhood in terms of its own interests and femininity likewise,” which limits opportunities for women (Frances, 1969, p. 1). 

## Classroom Conditions
Expectations for the field of CS start with impressions and exposure to CS from teachers, peers or educational programs. However, certain communities such as underfunded school districts in rural areas tend to have significantly less access to CS resources (Gagnon & Mattingly, 2015). Nearly half the students in rural school districts are not enrolled in a single Advanced Placement (AP) course (Rankin & Thomas, 2021). The lack of funding for AP courses and quality teachers results in hostile learning environments, resulting in a negative association between the class and computer science. One qualitative study shares an experience in a high schooler taking her first CS class, except the curriculum was entirely focused on money making simulations with no relation to computers (Rankin & Thomas, 2021). In another qualitative study, a student shares her experience taking an intro CS class with an aggressive and non-approachable instructor, who would make​ the student feel bad for asking questions. She distinctly recalls the instructor keeping the classroom at cold temperatures with all the doors and windows open, even during the winter (Rankin & Thomas, 2021). These are examples of gaps in access to quality resources not executing on a student's needs and desire to learn. However, it’s not always the teachers who are insensitive towards quality classroom conditions and curriculum. Much of the experience with the CS curriculum takes place outside of the classroom and collaborating with peers. One primary source recalls seeing groups of students of the same ethnic background studying together (Rankin & Thomas, 2021). The limited number of black students in CS results in students feeling like they don’t fit in which leads students to feel isolated from peers and creates a barrier to collaboration. Crenshaw warns that “ignoring differences within groups frequently contributes to tensions among groups, another problem of identity politics that frustrates efforts to politicize violence against [each other]” (2005, 1).

## Workplace Conditions
Similar to the male-dominated field of traditional finance, the groups with privilege in the context of computer science are white men. Only 38% of women who majored in CS are actually working in the field compared to 53% of men (Hamrick, 2019). A qualitative study recounting women’s work experiences as a product manager in tech finds that the workplace and teams are dominated by a style of brogramming culture, which has been described as the leading reason for women leaving the CS pipeline (Pozos & Friend, 2021). Research conducted by a Fortune 500 company finds that the most common reasons women leave their tech jobs include weak management support or lack of job opportunities, which have been found to manifest destructively for women of color (Capital One, 2019). In another qualitative study, a summer intern shared her experiences in a violent work environment at her company: “I never experienced so much prejudice on a day to day basis until I went away. And so getting stared at or wearing my hair unprocessed or...just being a Black woman” as a result limits fruitful interpersonal relations and skewing networking opportunities (Rankin & Erete & Thomas, 2021). The male dominant narrative puts women in uncomfortable positions where their cultural differences and appearances are called out but “the failure of the academic feminists to recognize difference as a crucial strength is a failure to reach beyond the first patriarchal lesson” (Lorde, p. 96). From a compensation perspective, men already have the upper advantage. Historically, women have been paid less than men for the same job, and the gender wage gap is evident in tech. The most recent Census Bureau shows that, in 2021, full-time working women earned 84 cents to the dollar of what their male counterparts make. 

## Outcomes 
The lack of representation in CS research leads to biases and inaccuracies in software programs such as commercial artificial intelligence (AI) systems. Across major companies such as IBM, Microsoft and Face++, we see that their respective AI systems perform better in recognizing male subjects than female subjects and perform better on lighter-skinned subjects than darker-skinned subjects. When we dig deeper into the study at the intersectionality of the two identities, the AI systems were always more likely to perform worse on dark-skinned females. IBM had the largest gap in inaccuracy with an 34 percent error rate in recognizing dark-skinned women (MIT News Office, 2018). Diverse perspectives in tech are important for building holistic products, especially products that are built for the future and inclusive of all users' ethnicity, gender, impairments and background. In terms of AI research, more diverse dataset images means more accuracy in AI systems. In terms of capitalism, more inclusive products means happier consumers. 

## Progress
One barrier of entry to CS that has been developing in the recent decade is increasing access to school programs and extracurricular activities through video based coding courses making resources more accessible. There is a preconception in CS education that high school students with exposure to Calculus and early college programs are more likely to fit the mold of being CS material in college resulting in a self-fulfilling prophecy for those who do not fit that narrative (Rankin & Thomas, 2021). Much of the action taken on inclusivity in tech involves programs funded by non-governmental efforts outside of the classroom such as bootcamps and diversity recruitment programs for internships. For example, Black Girls Code (BGC) is an education program with chapters across major cities of the U.S. and Africa that cover a curriculum that isn’t even covered in high school AP courses: web design, game design, mobile app design and robotics. Google’s Building Opportunities for Leadership and Development (BOLD) Internship Program prioritizes applicants from historically underrepresented groups in the tech industry, in hopes to increase participation for underrepresented groups.

## Discussion
By exploring macro and micro lenses, we are able to better understand the underrepresentation of Black women in the field of tech as a consequence of conditions that actively keep Black women in computer science. One outcome is that we see more Black women represented in the undergraduate major and a disproportionate number in the workforce. The Women of Color in Computing Data Brief found that among all women in tech, black women hold 7% of jobs (2016, p. 5), while among all women who earned a CS Bachelor’s degree, Black women are the highest recipients among minority groups, about 15% (2016, p. 4). There is a divide in the pipeline from CS education to the tech industry. Though the field is relatively new, future research needs to be done in exploring the effectiveness of the aforementioned recruiting programs when hiring employees of diverse backgrounds, so that conditions need to be changed from within the companies to encourage beneficial mentorships or fruitful interpersonal relations. “The new world that we are struggling to create must destroy oppression of any type. The value of this new system will be determined by the status of those persons who are presently most oppressed,” which works well with the idea that the group can only be as successful as its least fulfilled member (Frances, 1969, p. 7). 
